---
title: End of CTIS Data Collection
parent: COVID-19 Trends and Impact Survey
nav_order: 10
---

# End of CTIS Data Collection
{: .no_toc}

The US COVID-19 Trends and Impact Survey will stop inviting new respondents to
complete the survey on June 25, 2022. All aggregate data will remain publicly
available, and microdata will continue to be available to academic and nonprofit
researchers. We provide details below on this decision and how it will affect
users of the data.


## Why CTIS Data Collection is Concluding

CTIS was launched at the height of the global COVID-19 emergency, on April 6,
2020, to enable daily syndromic surveillance at a time when testing and data on
the emerging pandemic were limited. Since CTIS launched, pandemic response
decision-makers from around the world have utilized CTIS’ daily data on symptoms
associated with COVID-19, such as fevers, coughing or shortness of breath – as
well as other topics covered in the survey from mask wearing to COVID-related
job loss. See [below](#ctis-impact) to learn more about how CTIS has supported
the COVID-19 response.

At this point in the pandemic, reliable data to track similar topics as CTIS
have become more widely available. Additionally, CTIS response rates have
declined over time, and as COVID-19 has evolved, there is less need for large,
daily data collection and greater need for measurement of topics that do not
change significantly on a daily basis. Since CTIS is designed specifically for
large-scale, daily data collection, the Delphi Group at Carnegie Mellon
University (CMU), the University of Maryland Social Data Science Center (UMD)
and Meta have made the decision to stop collecting new survey responses. We are
working to curate and archive the tens of millions of privacy-protected survey
responses received since 2020 and the aggregate estimates derived from them to
ensure the data remain available to academic and nonprofit researchers.

Sampling will be suspended in the United States on June 25, 2022. For details on
the schedule of the international version administered by the University of
Maryland, see [their end-of-survey
announcement](https://gisumd.github.io/COVID-19-API-Documentation/docs/notice/end_of_survey.html).


## Availability of Data After the Conclusion of CTIS

We are working to archive the data that has been collected so it can continue to
inform public health decisions for years to come. In line with CTIS policies and
standards during the sampling period, all data will be maintained in a way that
continues to preserve user privacy.

All CTIS aggregate data will continue to be available after data collection
stops on June 25, 2022 on [UMD‘s Global CTIS](https://covidmap.umd.edu/) and the
Delphi Group at CMU’s US CTIS websites. Academic and nonprofit researchers may
continue to [request access](./data-access.md) to non-public, non-aggregated
survey data for their research, and current approved data users will be able to
continue accessing the non-aggregated data until their current data use
agreements (DUA) expire. Researchers currently holding a fully executed DUA will
have the option to extend their DUA after it expires. Though no new data will be
collected after June 25, 2022, [Meta’s CTIS
visualizations](https://dataforgood.facebook.com/covid-survey/) will continue to
be available, and until the end of 2022, [JH CCP’s COVID Behaviors
dashboard](https://covidbehaviors.org/) will as well.


## CTIS Impact

CTIS is the largest public health survey ever conducted and has been used to
inform the decisions of governments, health organizations, nonprofits, research
institutions and academics around the world as they implemented their COVID-19
response efforts. The survey data has been used by over 100 stakeholders across
over 60 countries. CTIS has demonstrated the positive impact that surveys of
health behaviors and needs can have on improving access to health information,
support, and care.

For example, the Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) uses CTIS
data to inform its COVID-19 prediction models. Via these models, CTIS mask
wearing data [informed a mask mandate in
Poland](https://scontent-atl3-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t39.8562-6/239409865_949264702522493_1292335916807550455_n.pdf?_nc_cat=106&ccb=1-5&_nc_sid=ae5e01&_nc_ohc=-e4DmQpaV94AX-57y2C&_nc_ht=scontent-atl3-1.xx&oh=00_AT8LeGMwJErh4Yfglm0ldVtg5tdVfFvGQFHbSFxfJ2HOFw&oe=6251EB4B),
which contributed to a significant drop in COVID-19 cases. In the US, a Johns
Hopkins University study using CTIS data [published in
Science](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abh2939) on household
COVID-19 risk and in-person schooling contributed to the US CDC’s Independent
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices’ recommendation to allow
vaccinations in younger children. Several research groups used CTIS data to
produce forecasts for the [COVID-19 Forecast
Hub](https://covid19forecasthub.org/), used by the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention to inform COVID-19 response. Overall, there have been [roughly 20
peer-reviewed research articles using the US survey
data](https://delphi.cmu.edu/covid19/ctis/#publications) as of April 2022, with
more currently in progress.

We are grateful to the millions of Facebook users that took the survey, many of
them taking it multiple times over the course of two years. Thank you as well to
the many researchers, nonprofit leaders and public health officials who have
ensured and continue to ensure that CTIS responses inform public health
decisions around the globe.
